hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question how does Israel's war in Gaza
fit into US National Security interests
let's get to the bottom
line despite a fragile pause in the
fighting all signs point the long-term
conflict in the Middle East and not only
between Palestinians and Israelis there
have been attacks all along the border
between Lebanon and Israel for the past
month and a half and recently the houis
in Yemen a thousand miles away hijacked
the cargo ship owned by an Israeli
businessman for the US which has made
huge commitments to Israel militarily
financially and diplomatically since
Israel's war on Gaza started last month
the region is stuck between domestic
policy currents and foreign policy
interests President Joe Biden's Embrace
of Israel is dividing his own party an
increasing number of Americans from both
parties say that Israel has gone too far
in its response to the attacks by Hamas
so where is US policy heading and where
do us National Security interests really
lie those interests are up for debate in
today's America so we'll be getting two
very different takes we'll start with a
view from the right with Ambassador John
Bolton who served as National Security
adviser under former president Donald
Trump Ambassador thank you so much for
joining us today as we're speaking uh
Israel and Hamas have reached a deal
where Israeli hostages are going to be
exchanged for Palestinian prisoners how
do you feel about this deal and what are
your expectations well I think everybody
from a humanitarian point of view should
welcome the people who were kidnapped on
October the 7th being released I I have
a general objection to making swap deals
for hostages I think this case is a good
example of why it's a bad idea number
one the ratio is 3 to1 uh that's that's
never a good sign number two the people
that Israel is going to release are
essentially criminals they're not people
who were kidnapped while they were
enjoying themselves at Rock festivals or
something like that so I think this
moral equivalen ism mistake and I think
it gives an incentive to hostage takers
uh because if they can bargain like this
uh they know that taking hostages is
well worth it and I also don't like many
of the terms associated with the deal uh
it may be that a pause of four days does
give Israel some time to regroup and
rethink its next steps but H but Hamas
is far and a way the greater beneficiary
terms of extricating some of its
Fighters regrouping hiding the other
hostages exfiltrating some of their
people
uh from Gaza and I don't like the plan
the part that says if Hamas turns over
another 10 people a day the pause can
continue I would never give my enemy
control over the extent of the ceasefire
and I think although again I understand
fully the compassionate humanitarian
argument here I don't think we should
look we should miss the Strategic
implications I think Israel's right of
self-defense includes eliminating the
Hamas threat and to the extent we take
take our eye off that strategic
objective I think it increases the
chances they will fail and we will be
right back to where we were on October
the 6th in Fairly short order but the
global South is screaming you've got a
lot of our European allies that are um
uh really calling out Israel for
overreaction and what they see as
indiscriminate killing of many
Palestinians I mean I guess my question
to you is if you were in an office and
and Advising any next president that
came up should there not be some e
effort to really diminish the the the
footprint of horror for innocence yeah
well you know in terms of the
international pressure I can tell you
when I've been in the government and
I've heard about International pressure
if I had a switch inside my ear I'd just
turn it off if you don't pay any
attention to it it's not pressure but
here's where I think the most important
point that many commentators and and and
national leaders are missing I do not
consider this a war of Hamas against
Israel I considered this a war by some
of America's worst enemies led by the
mulles in tan using their terrorist
surrogate groups like Hamas Hezbollah
like the hoodies in Yemen like the
militia groups in Iraq in what kasum
sulamani the late kasum sulamani called
the ring of fire strategy against Israel
and that's why I think in the Arab world
in particular if people understood this
better and I think many of the leaders
do understand it they would see this is
not an attack on the Arab world this is
Israel defending itself from the
leadership in Teran uh and and doing to
the Palestinian people what has happened
to them in the past being used by
Outsiders for their own uh purposes and
I think if you understand that in that
respect it would be easier not easy but
easier for many people in the region to
understand what Israel is doing uh and
to see where the real perpetrator the
real moral cause of this is and and it
is the government of Iran what is your
view of President Biden's take on Israel
Palestine and you know what are your
view I know you've got some provocative
thoughts on this yeah I think the
two-state solution is irretrievably
wounded uh I think it was dead before
October the 7th I think it's dead and
buried now I don't think Israel is ever
going to consent to the creation of a
state on its borders that's run by
terrorists uh I think uh my my view has
been for a long time what I call the
three-state solution and nobody likes
that either but I would say
congratulations to the Egyptian you now
have sovereignty again over the Gaza
Strip as you did pre
1967 and I think on the West Bank I
think this is actually more doable I
think Israel and Jordan have to figure
out a relationship that returns some
sovereignty over the West Gaza to Egypt
and give West Bank part of the West Bank
to Jordan now I happen to think this is
actually the best measure for the for
the welfare of the Palestinian people I
think the notion of a Palestinian state
that includes Gaza and an archipelago of
dots on the West Bank cannot be
economically viable and I think for
Palestinians and their families these
people need to be part of a of a strong
economy their children need to have
schools they need to be in a place where
they can lead a normal life and in the
Gaza Strip and many places of the West
Bank it's simply not possible let's not
kid our eles let's put the welfare of
the Palestinians above ideological
dreams I mean I I mean let me just
wrestle with you a little bit on this
why abandon the notion that somehow with
security and autonomy and creating
conditions where
responsible um
Palestinian Patriots that believe in um
you know a sort of fair future for their
people um and a balanced future
recognizing Israel why is that dream
gone because you know for 75 years
Palestinians have been trying to cling
to that land well they've been trying to
cling to a part of the land they're
never going to get back which is called
Israel their their whole argument is
they were forcibly displaced during the
1948 conflict uh and in subsequent
conflicts uh and they decare themselves
to be refugees 5 million I think that's
the right number of Palestinians are
registered as refugees with unra the the
problem is we have allowed those who had
uh aims to weaponize the Palestinians
against Israel to use them in ways very
unfair to the Palestinians and we have
allowed the idea that Refugee status for
Palestinians uh is hereditary which it
is not humanitarian Doctrine on refugees
across the world since
1945 with this one exception has been
that life and Refugee circumstances is
the worst outcome of all that for the
refugee population they either need to
return to their country of origin or
they need to be resettled given the
politics they're not going to go back to
what they consider their country of
origin it's not going to happen Israel
is not going to disappear so that's why
I think resettlement for the
Palestinians themselves is the fairest
most just way uh to resolve their status
so how does that not fall into the
definition of ethnic cleansing which
triggers all these accusations of war
crimes that ethnic cleansing you hear at
con constantly is what the criticism of
Israel has been uh for Palestinians who
feel wrongly displaced from their land
and right now we see even the Israeli
government trying to withhold Israeli
the the settler movement uh in the West
Bank and prompting violence with the
West Bank to further encroach on this
right well that's that's not my argument
my argument is that after conflicts
there are often large flows of
populations if you look at the world
after World War II it was filled with
refugees we see that with Ukraine Russia
we see refugees all over the world now
right and the the worst place for these
people is in refugee camps it's
especially the worst place when they
live there generation after generation
the fact is that resettlement in viable
economies in the region would make a lot
of sense but for the fact Arab
governments don't want to take the
Palestinians in this is another
consequence of the terrible decision to
weaponize the Palestinian refugees in
Egypt they're concerned that Hamas which
is a subsidiary of the Muslim
Brotherhood would simply be a greater
threat to Egypt the Jordanian government
feels the same way so there's there's a
lot of work that needs to be done here I
don't deny it but I tell you resettling
people in Gaza after this conflict is
just going to mean the conflict is going
to happen again the Palestinian
Authority is not an alternative back in
the 2007 elections I think it was in
Gaza people were surprised that Hamas
won and and and many said well you know
it's actually not because they favor
terrorism they simply will not tolerate
the dysfunctional corrupt Palestinian
Authority taking control and Hamas
looked like an alternative let's face it
not much of an alternative I think I
think that Gaza is different from the
West Bank I think the West Bank is
amendable to different solutions but for
Gaza which is a large refugee camp that
is not a solution that uh is the best
future for the Palestinian people let me
ask you about what's going on inside
America are you surprised by you know
the the you know this growing ground
swell of criticism of Israel's actions
after the Hamas attacks and US
complicity and support uh in in that
response yes I I am very surprised at it
I I think it's a potentially a mortal
wound politically for Joe Biden you know
in the last 50 years the two parties
completely reversed themselves it used
to be the Democrats very pro-israel
Republicans not often because of
anti-Semitism let's be honest about it
within the Republican Party now because
of the shifting views of the Evangelical
Christians who are more strongly
supportive of Israel than some in the
Jewish Community Republican party is
close to unanimous in supporting Israel
the Democrats I think look split down
anti-semites and all the Republican
Party amazingly but the Democrats are
split down the middle and I think this
is a really serious problem for Joe
Biden in 2024 um there are a lot of
people who don't see this conflict the
way you do and they they don't see uh
the kind of pro-israel stance in the
same way they make support Palestinians
see um Decades of Injustice see it
differently some of these people are
being canceled or fired Etc I know
you've always been a proponent of fair
and open discourse and debate how do you
feel about the criticism of those who do
stand up for the Palestinian side in
this and not Hamas but but Palestinian
citizens who even from whether it's
David Petraeus or Congressman Seth
Molton or other saying hey there has to
be a political Horizon for these people
yeah well look I I think you can take
that position and not be anti-semitic
and I think uh perhaps it's because many
people in America are so surprised at
the extent of the support for
Palestinians uh but I do I do think
there's a deal of anti-Semitism in the
United States and I think we're we're
seeing it now well former US National
Security adviser John Bolton I really
appreciate you coming on this show and
sharing your candid views thank you so
much thanks for having me now we turn to
Sarah Lee witson the former Executive
Director of Human Rights Watch in the
middle e in North Africa and currently
the executive director of democracy for
the Arab world now Sarah it's very nice
of you to join us today this is a very
sobering uh disturbing subject on many
levels and let me just start out if you
were advising the Biden Administration
today what would be a few of the key
steps you would put in place in response
to this crisis so very basically uh we
think it's important that the United
States starts to enforce its own laws
and rules with respect to weapons trans
transfers to Israel and I think even a
minimal application um would require a
suspension of weapons uh uh if we are to
be in compliance with us laws second the
US needs to support a ceasefire uh we
have seen in the over 40 days that the
United States has solely permitted this
war to continue by blocking uh basic
even pause resolutions until uh very
very late in in the game right uh that
uh uh no no military advant has come of
it really all we have is an unbelievable
level of death and destruction uh by
some calculations over 75% of the
casualties are civilians and over the
vast majority of those are women and
children if we had pushed for a
ceasefire from the very beginning if we
had stopped blocking a ceasefire uh we
might not see the Carnage that we're
seeing today on more medium-term and
long term just to conclude the thought
um we need uh to support International
peacekeeping forces uh in Gaza and we
need to commit internationally to the
Reconstruction of Gaza so that we do not
permit Israel to achieve its goal of
depopulating Gaza to ensure that the
people of Gaza can return to their homes
in what is now being called North Gaza
um and uh uh uh to not allow the war
crime of force displacement to be
fulfilled what how do you get to some
place where people feel they can live
with dignity they can live with autonomy
they can have rights and Justice um how
do we get there well I mean those are
two very different questions I think the
first is about the force displacement of
Palestinians uh including some uh
Israeli plans to relocate the people of
uh Gaza to Egypt for example um and some
of the talking points that I'm seeing
floated around there uh is that this is
for their own protection this is for
their own security no it's not for their
protection and it's not for their
security it is to fulfill uh Israel's
LGH held uh desire to depopulate Gaza
and the United States and the
International Community should not
facilitate that it should not facilitate
creating a permanent buffer zone of of
gaza's territory nor should it agree to
cramming Palestinians in so-called South
Gaza uh permanently uh and certainly
should not agree to forcing Palestinians
to go to Egypt uh and to try to resettle
them there if the people of Gaza need
urgent medical care Israel is
responsible for providing them that
military care why doesn't Israel open up
its own borders and boundaries if it
wants the people of Gaza uh to flee from
Israeli bombs and bombardment Egypt
should not have to shol that burden and
find itself complici in these war crimes
as for a longer term solution I think
that for the last 30 years the oso
Accords the International Community has
been stuck in a stale and expired
framework that demands some kind of a
negotiated solution between two blocks
one block being the Palestinian people
and one block being the Israeli people
um and only after uh that negotiated
solution uh can Palestinians hope to
enjoy basic human rights equality and
freedom that's a failed approach and the
right approach uh is to say that in fact
the first thing that needs to happen is
that Israel needs to respect the basic
human rights of all of the people under
its sovereignty and all of the people
under its sovereignty do indeed extend
from The River To The Sea uh it needs to
ensure the end of occupation and the end
of aparti uh from where from which
position The People Under Israeli
sovereignty can vote democratically
maybe some Palestinians choose one
answer maybe some Israelis choose a
different answer however it is that
should that answer of how that territory
should be configured must be a
democratic process and nobody can impose
that on the people against their will
that's a basic tenant of democracy Sarah
let me ask you about the human beings in
this in this um equation right now in
the hostage swap for prisoners we're
seeing a lot of the pictures at least I
am of the hostages that have been
released and come back into Israel uh in
many cases very moving the families the
people the stories behind them I'm
interested to also know about the
prisoners who've been held and to the
degree that you know and that you can
share your perspective because some
Americans have said those are criminals
in Israeli prisons I'd like to kind of
have a deeper understanding of the
Palestinians that are being released in
this um
swap um well as you know aside from
their names there's very little
information that is coming out about
these prisoners I guess so far only
women and children uh who have been
released uh and it is forbidden in
Israel for Palestinians to celebrate the
release of their loved ones uh for these
prisoners to talk about their
imprisonment uh uh and to describe uh uh
what what they've endured uh in
detention I think it's very important
for for viewers to understand uh that
though these people are called prisoners
many of them are not lawfully imprisoned
they've never had a trial they've never
had evidence presented against them
they've never been able to challenge uh
their detention and their imprisonment
because they are subject to military
rules that allow for what Israel calls
administrative detention that means that
I as the state can imprison you on the
basis of secret evidence that I don't
tell you what that secret evidence is
without bringing you before a judge uh
and uh renew that detention and that
imprisonment indefinitely in perpetuity
so many of the people who uh are now
released uh from uh Israeli captivity
have never been lawfully imprisoned uh
they have never been found guilty of any
crime so to call them criminals uh is
really really jumping ahead of the
evidence and we know that there are
thousands of Palestinians including
women including children who are
imprisoned in this Kafkaesque
unbelievable system of imprisoning
people on secret evidence
indefinitely but a lot of people look at
the Israeli Gaza crisis as a function of
proxy battles of other players and I and
I guess the question I have is how much
of this is that's a mistaken blind spot
this is really about Palestinian Justice
not Iran not a prun I mean I I want to
know how you look at
it um uh I I think it's an insult to
Palestinians to say that they are merely
proxy agents of Iran um Iran may be
choosing to support uh some armed groups
uh in the Middle East uh just as other
parties in the region very unfortunately
very sadly support other armed groups in
the region just the way the United
States was supporting armed groups in
Syria uh just the way that uh other uh
uh countries have unfortunately been
supporting armed groups and terrorist
acts inside Iran unfortunately I don't
think anyone is innocent of that um but
let's not confuse that with the
grievances um that open up people to
receiving weapons for example uh uh that
that give them something to fight for
let's just recognize um that
Palestinians in Gaza in particular have
been living under an unbelievable Siege
uh since 2006 a near complete closure of
the territory that has stifled and
strangled the two million people there
cutting them off from the rest of the
world limiting even their caloric intake
subjecting them to regular patterns of
bombardment um I think the fact of the
matter is that if it wasn't Iran
somebody else uh would find a way to
support these grievances uh that
Palestinians have uh and exploit them of
course maybe for nefarious ends or not
but that doesn't take away from the
fundamental grievance as for the larger
geopolitical uh consequences of what's
happened since October 7 I think it has
exposed uh really the complete failure
of the Biden Administration Str strategy
and approach to the Middle East one that
was predicated on uh pursuing so-called
stability uh by aligning an apartheid
state apartheid Israel with various
Petro dollar dictatorships in the region
and thinking that they could bypass the
Palestinian entirely the as the
Palestinian problem entirely uh by
building these little dictatorial
alliances in the region um I think that
has been exploded uh as a strategy y for
stability you will not have stability so
long as you have this sort of extreme
oppression and subjugation the natural
human instinct is to resist and to fight
back um and you will not be able to
ignore the occupation of Palestinians uh
and bypass resolving that conflict as a
path uh to Middle East stability and
security I hope that the Biden
Administration has woken up to that
reality uh and I hope that the Arab
states that signed the Abraham Accords
uh uh thinking that they too could
profit and benefit from bypassing
Palestinians by getting little payoffs
from the United States I hope they too
rethink that and rethink the dangers to
their own stability for being seen so
closely aligned uh to Israel in the face
of this massive Slaughter of civilians
there but that remains to be
seen Sarah Lee witson executive director
of Dawn and former Executive Director of
Human Rights Watch in the Middle East
and North Africa thanks so much for your
cander and joining us today thank you
for having me so what's the bottom line
I feel Ambassador Bolton is wrong on
ideas like resettling Palestinians
elsewhere which amounts to a
continuation of the ethnic removal of
Palestinians from the occupied
territories some would call this ethnic
cleansing a war crime but he is correct
when he says that any resolution of the
Palestinian question is really hard to
achieve whether it's a one-state system
that's blind to religion and ethnicity
or or two separate states or any plan
that really offers dignity and autonomy
for Palestinians that's why there's a
war underway and the dereliction of
responsibility of world powers on this
problem has led to This Global horrible
conflict in which so many are dying it's
hard to listen to views that we disagree
with but we do have to hear the spectrum
of debate as it really is in Washington
today not what we would wish it to be
and that's the bottom
line
[Music]